# Categorical Data Analysis in Epidemiology
 
Health research, particularly when serious and potentially fatal diseases are involved, often focuses on extending life (delaying death).  However, an important part of health care, and an important part of health research, is preserving and improving quality of life.  For example, among patients with incurable cancer, both clinical care and research should consider not just how long patients survive, but also patients' quality of life and, in particular, whether some quality of life is preserved until the time of death.  Hospice is end-of-life care focused on pain management and quality of life in the time immediately preceding death.  Many experts on end-of-life care regard hospice care as the best option for providing the highest quality of life near death, sometimes referred to as "quality of death."  Among patients who die with a terminal cancer diagnosis, roughly half are enrolled in hospice at the time of death.

Phase 1 trials of experimental cancer therapies provide valuable scientific knowledge and are an important step in developing new beneficial treatments. The specific goal of a Phase 1 trial is to determine dosing or general safety/toxicity; the goal of a Phase 1 trial is not to evaluate therapeutic benefit. Phase 1 trial participants help advance research in cancer treatment, but are less likely to reap direct personal benefit from trial participation compared to participants in later-phase trials. This raises issues surrounding the balance between research interests and patients’ interests. While it is expected and accepted that Phase 1 trial participation may have little or no benefit to the patients themselves, a real concern is whether trial participation unduly burdens participants and detracts from quality of life.

Patients enrolled in a clinical trial cannot enroll in hospice care.  Therefore, a natural concern for patients with a terminal diagnosis is whether Phase I trial participation interferes with patients enrolling in hospice, thereby threatening quality of death.  To investigate whether this concern is real, investigators gathered data from deceased patients diagnosed with thoracic or head/neck cancer at a single cancer treatment center where they were cared for until death.  They sampled all available patients who enrolled in a Phase 1 trial after diagnosis.  For the comparison group, they sampled patients who did not enroll in a Phase 1 trial.  This is a much larger set of patients, from which the investigators sampled 120 patients.  The outcome of interest is hospice enrollment (yes/no).  Sampling was not based on hospice enrollment; this is not a case-control study.

The researchers have collected the data but have little knowledge of statistics.  My job was to analyze the data, interpret the results, and to understand the strengths and limitations of their study.
